About Us

TWELVE APOSTLES STUDENT ASSOCIATION (TASA) HISTORY

INTRODUCTION
The establishment of TASA was a divine revelation. Prominent leaders of the society are mostly those who are produced by the institutions of higher learning. It is where students learn about ideologies, beliefs, faiths, which consequently shape their perspective of the universe. The environment also encourages informal learning, which finds them vulnerable to opportunistic negative motives. It therefore cannot be disputed that tertiary level is the right stage for the youth to be taught about God and what he expects from human beings. In that way the society will have leaders who know God, fear Him, respect Him, and therefore lead the society with sanity.

BACKGROUND
While the TASA was officially established and registered in 1995, it all started back in 1993, when students who belonged to the Twelve Apostles Church in Christ (TACC) met at University of the Western Cape (UWC). Br Mzonyana Enoch Sidinana (currently an Overseer) registered for BCom Degree at the UWC in 1993 and was residing at Bellville campus. Br Lizo Hubert Makele (currently an Overseer) registered at Peninsula Technicon (currently known as the Cape Peninsula University of Technology). Br Makele was traveling to the Technicon daily in order to attend the lectures. Br Sidinana requested Br Makele to share the room with him at the campus during the week to avoid this daily traveling.
All the church activities were taking place at the township, i.e. Nyanga, Philippi, Langa and Khayelitsha. In the same year, they were joined by Sr Nomsa Gumbi, whom they met through responding to a notice she posted on the notice board enquiring about Twelve Apostolic Church of Africa (TACA) members that were residing at UWC campus. Br Sidinana and Br Makele visited her and through the conversation they all agreed to attend TACC services together at the township until 1995 when TASA activities commenced in the campus.
In 1994 Br Malibongwe Tshikila (who was a Priest when he left the TACC) also registered at UWC and shared a room with Br Sidinana and Br Makele. He was followed by Br Wiseman Mfihlo (currently District Elder) who was also registered at UWC student but staying outside the campus. In 1995, Br Makele requested Br Mfihlo to share the room with him at Peninsula Technicon instead of traveling daily with train from Khayetsha in order to attend the lectures.

FORMAL ESTABLISHMENT OF TASA
It was in 1995 at Western Cape Province, South Africa, in a small town called Bellville where the university students who belonged to the Twelve Apostles Church in Christ (TACC) decided to establish and register a student religious body affiliated to the TACC at the University of the Western Cape.

Br Sidinana’s election to the TACC Western Cape Provincial Youth Committee in 1994 was a blessing as he gained access to the senior church leadership where he could represent the interests of students. Through the interaction with the then provincial Overseer D Ximbi (now a District Apostle), a lot was revealed. Br Sidinana used to attend worship services in the campus in the same manner as the Student Christian Movement (SCM). While a part-time member of the SCM, it was an exciting revelation to him by Father Ximbi that the SCM was actually an affiliate of a particular Christian church denomination. He immediately shared this with the other 3 students (Makele, Tshikila & Gumbi).

This inspiration responded directly to the challenges experienced by these students for having to travel to the townships for church services and activities as there were not enough resources to sustain them. This was also to make it easy for them to recruit new members at the campus as they did not have to invite them to go out of campus.

Driven by a burning desire to fulfil the requirements of the calling, which was being hampered by these challenges, these students started investigating possibilities of finding a worshiping venue at the campus. Br Sidinana’s involvement with Student Representative Council SRC) in 1995 made it possible to find out the processes and procedures to be followed in order to register the church student body at the university. It was discovered during this exploration that other religious faiths had their students affiliates registered at the university, enjoying all privileges, amenities and benefits from the university.

Filled with excitement of this discovery, and an agreement was reached among the four students (Sidinana, Makele, Tshikila and Gumbi) to establish a TACC student body, a meeting was convened with the Western Cape TACC Leadership for guidance. Present in the meeting were the four students together with Overseer D Ximbi (now District Apostle), District Elder M Zungula (now District Apostle) and Brother Philip Zakhele Phakathi.

On reaching the consensus on the establishment of the TACC student body, a name had to be given to it. After a long discussion about the naming of this association, the name “Twelve Apostles Student Association” (TASA) was adopted. Two concerns raised about the name were to have the name that would accommodate all apostolic faiths student and the name that would unambiguously and uncompromisingly link the association to the TACC as the mother body in order to maintain identity. This was endorsed with the blessings from the TACC Chief Apostle and President (Professor C Nongqunga).

The first major task for the TASA was to draft the constitution, which was one of the conditions for the registration. With the assistance of experienced TACC members Br Nceba Njenxa and Priest Bheki Msimanga were amongst the team to craft TASA constitution. The other challenging requirement by the university was for TASA to prove their membership of a minimum threshold of 50 registered students. Within a very short space of time, 62 students signed up as membership of TASA and the registration process went smoothly.

In 1996 for the first time, TASA was given s stall during the orientation period where membership forms were distributed and TASA banners flown. Br Mfihlo was instrumental in ensuring that stall was successful through the registration of new membership. This recruitment was successful as 28 new students joined TASA.

FIRST TASA MEMBERS

Mzonyana Enoch Sidinana
He was a BComm student residing at the campus of the UWC in Bellville. He is the one who led the exploration process and the facilitation of the ultimate registration of TASA at the UWC as he was assisting at the SRC office.
He was assisted by Sister Nomsa Gumbi, who was also residing at the same campus. That involved consultations and negotiations with the SRC and relevant university authorities. He became the first Chairperson of TASA at UWC and ensured that TASA was marketed to the university and to new students at each orientation period.

Nomsa Gumbi,
Sister Gumbi was doing a degree in Social Work. It was in the middle of the year 1993 when she decided to look for the members of her church who might be in the same university so as to start worshiping together. She placed a notice on the residence notice board, announcing a meeting of the members of the Twelve Apostolic Church of Africa (TACA), which was to be held at 7pm in her room. Br Sidinana, who was amazed and excited by the presence of his church at the university (as he miraculously misread the name of the church), shared the exciting news to Br Makele, his roommate, and that’s how they met sister Gumbi. These brothers were the only people who responded to this notice and from then Gumbi joined TACC and started attending church services in the township, until the establishment of TASA in 1995.

Hubert Lizo Makele
Makele was a Human Resources Management student at the Peninsula Technikon and had just moved from Gugulethu Township to share a room with Br Sidinana at UWC. While not a registered UWC student, he played a prominent role in the establishment of TASA and was instrumental in the drafting of its constitution. At the end of 1995, he left for East London to start with his first professional Job, leaving behind all other TASA co-founders at the university.

Malibongwe Tshikila
Brother Tshikila was a Bachelor of Public Administration (BAdmin) student residing at UWC campus and was still a new member of the TACC. He was instrumental in making sure that TASA stall and banners ware visible on the campus during the registration. .

Wiseman Mfihlo
While he registered in 1993, Mfihlo was staying in Khayelitsha and therefore started participating in the TASA activities late in 1995 when he moved in to share a room with Br Makele at the Peninsula Technikon. He was also still a new member of the TACC. He was also very instrumental in making sure that TASA banners and stall were visible on the campus during the registration.

TASA EVOLUTION
Although TASA was now a recognized affiliate of the TACC, it took a while for it to be known in the broader TACC community. The main reason for this was the fact that its active members were already approaching their 3rd year of their studies, which left them little time and resources to cover all aspects of establishing and settling the new organisation. Activities such as starting new branches, publicizing, building of stable succession pipeline, etc. suffered as a result. As soon as they left the campus to commence with their employment, TASA activities diminished and ended at UWC.

Because TASA was not established through people’s wisdom, but as God’s plan, it therefore could not die, hence its resurgence at the University of Port Elizabeth and Peninsula Technikon in 2003. Now was a time for it to spread across South Africa. TASA registrations were therefore taking place at a fast pace at many universities and Technikons across the country.

Resurgence of TASA in the Western Cape
In 2003, TACC church activities started at Peninsula Technikon. Lizo Makele, one of the TASA founders came back to work in Cape Town. As a Priest, he started a church community at the campus, using two TACC brothers who were residing at the campus but attending church activities in Stellenbosch. Those were brothers Xola Gubuza and Msawenkosi Xinwa. The congregation grew exponentially and the TASA became one of the recognized faith associations at the campus. The merger between Peninsula and Cape Technikons further enhanced the TASA growth in the Western Cape as Bellville brothers and sisters could easily infiltrate Cape Town facilities in spreading the word of God. At TASA, there are activities that are used to evangelise, such as sit-in (Sisters evening gatherings), biblical debates, etc. which are used as forms of evangelism and getting the message of Christ to new souls.

University of Port Elizabeth (UPE) launch in 2003

In 2002 the students started to attend at UPE, as it was becoming expensive for them to travel to the townships for services and also due to lack of transport in the evenings to attend weekly services. There were more students from TACC which were recognized and also students which were non-TACC members that joined the students that were attending services on campus.
TASA in UPE was predominantly led by sisters Angel Mhlambi, Zimasa Sipamla and Nosipho Sefoloko. As they had to travel extensively from campus to the township to attend services. They were introduced to Brother Malinzi who played a huge role in trying to assist the students coming all over the country for studies in PE that were TACC members in continuing in worshiping and praising the living God.
In 2003 Father Apostle Zungula approached one of the students, Zimasa Sipamla, and recommended that they establish an association for the students called Twelve Apostle Student Association (TASA). He further provided them with the background of TASA and that it was first established in the Western Cape. Father Apostle Zungula assisted with the processes for registration at UPE first. The registration was finalized and the first executive members of TASA at UPE were as follows:
Chairperson – Nosipho Mtshemla
Deputy Chairperson – Fezekile Breakfast
Treasury – Angel Mhlambi
Secretary – Nobahle Tshangane
They got introduced to Father Priest Nodwele as their leader. The students went to his house almost every day, especially after attending a service to give back the service report. Priest Nodwele supported and taught the students a lot about the doctrine of the Apostles. The students used to leave his house around 12 or 1am after hours of breaking bread that was the way of life which they lived by. When the TASA emblem was proposed by brother Breakfast now an Overseer, TASA took the emblem to Father Nodwele and bread was broken about the slogan until early hours of the morning.

The meaning of the Emblem
•	The Gold chain represents unity that gives us comfort within everyone who is within TASA “Chain of unity, peace and love”.
•	The Red Cross serves as source of our responsibilities, it gives us life.
•	The blood represents the Christian teachings that we receive from the Apostles and the sacrifices made by the membership in worshiping through tithes and offerings.
•	The open hands represent appreciation or acceptance the teachings mentioned in section 3.2.3.
TASA was formally launched in 2003, were former members of Western Cape, Chief Apostle Nongqunga and TACC members attended. Later on, TASA was registered in PE Technikon and thereafter the institutions merged to Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University (NMMU). TASA in NMMU grew rapidly by getting accolades from within the institution and its mother body.

National Conference of 2009
With the culture of love and the Christian way of life which was evident in the way things were done in TASA, there was a desire to ensure a common identity and a uniform way of operating in TASA in all the institutions of higher learning in which TASA was in existence in at the time. Thus discussions were held with our brothers and sisters from all institutions of higher learning in the country for TASA to have a National Conference in the Easter weekend of 2009. The aims of the Conference would be agree on a Constitution that would serve as a guide for all TASA operations , to elect a National Executive Committee and generally to discuss strategies to grow TASA across the country.
A task team mandated to organise the conference, establish the terms of reference, drawing drafts of guiding documents to guide TASA was convened and comprised of members from the institutions in which TASA was in existence. Vuyolwethu Zungula was given a responsibility to lead the task team and be the link between TASA and the church in the organising of this inaugural conference which was going to change the history of TASA for generations to come.
The conference was a resounding success, it was attended by delegated from Kwa-Zulu Natal, Eastern Cape, Western Cape, Gauteng and Free State. At the time, Father District Apostle Zungula was the mentor of TASA, He was in attendance in the conference with fellow Father Apostles Ntobongwana, Mtsolongo and Noveve. The conference elected the National Executive Committee as follows:
1.	Chairperson: Fikile Nzenge (now Priest Mcetywa)
2.	Secretary: Zine Fikeni
3.	Deputy Secretary: Siphokazi Nibe
4.	Treasurer: Mkhanyiseli Gumede (now Priest Gumede)
The conference further tasked the inaugural National Executive Committee to appoint a 5th member of the committee. The committee appointed Ndlela Mahlaba (now Deacon Mahlaba) as a Public Relations Officer. TASA grew at a rapid rate during this period and it was evident of the spirituality of the TASA branches when NMMU hosted the first TASA sealing service in January 2010. This wonderful work of God led the church to grant TASA a period where it could hold sealing services across the country.
Indeed the Living God time and time again showed His might as many branches had very successful and Spirit filled sealing services across the country from 2011, thus TASA not only grew in the understanding and the application of organisational principles as witnessed by annual National and Provincial Conferences, and branch annual general meetings but the state of spirituality was very strong and led to a spirit inspired TASA.
During this period, TASA was also established in Zimbabwe and Lesotho which made TASA an International Organisation. Even though TASA comprised of members coming from diverse cultures but they were spiritually one and this could only be through the influence of the Living God as only God could unite people in that manner.
In 2012 TASA had an elective conference which was held in conjunction with the Twelve Apostle’s Church in Christ Apostle Day service which was held at the ABSA stadium in East London on the 26 of May 2012. In the conference a National Executive Committee was elected, the committee elected was:
1.	Chairperson: Vuyolwethu Zungula
2.	Secretary: Akwaba Kamlana
3.	Deputy Secretary: Nosipho Sefoloko
4.	Treasurer: Ndlela Mahlaba
5.	Public Relations Officer: Siphokazi Nibe
This period was characterised by building from the wonderful work done by the inaugural National Executive Committee and key to that was determining the vision and strategic intent of TASA. This was to ensure TASA grows towards a particular direction and has certain objectives. A meeting of the newly elected committee was held with the TASA mentor in Ficksburg on the 30th of June 2012 and these proposals were agreed upon by the attendees of the meeting.

Vision
The Vision of TASA is to be “Mass Based Christian Association of Choice in Institutions of Higher Learning”
Matthew 28:19: Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost:
Mission
Mission Statement:
TASA will achieve its Vision through:
“Value Adding and Provision of comprehensive Spiritual, Social, Health, Economic and Academic development to Students, Communities and other stakeholders”
Motto
Motto: “Evolution Through Christ”
Philippians: 4:13: I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me.
Values
Values:
•	Christian Enlightenment and Spiritual Transformation
•	Human Wellness and Morality
•	Restoration of Peace and Unity
•	Intensive Promotion of Education
•	Sustainable Spiritual development
•	Thriving in God’s Love and Fellowship
These proposals were presented to the Chief Apostle who was happy with the strategic intent of TASA, they were further adopted as official TASA strategic intent in the National Conference of 2013 and thus incorporated into the Constitution and all guiding documents.
The focus led to TASA to reposition itself in the institutions of higher learning as a value adding organisation based on the five pillars of spirituality, academics, social, health and economical. A lot of students joined TASA during this period as the holistic outlook of TASA catered for many students who were looking for a balanced organisation which develops them in those five key spheres of life rather than only the spiritual element.
As the National Executive Committee is elected every 3 years, in the 2015 National Conference which was blessed by the presence of the Chief Apostle Caesar Nongqunga who breathed life unto the delegates which were in attendance, a new National Executive Committee was elected as follows:
1.	Chairperson: Vuyolwethu Zungula
2.	Secretary: Yolande Mafuya
3.	Deputy Secretary: Thomas Mwelase
4.	Treasurer: Lindelwa Mashalaba
5.	Public Relations Officer: Mxolisi Makhubu
One prominent aspect of the election was the words of the Chief Apostle when He got the outcomes of the election. He said “TASA your Spirit is alive”- these words were testimony to the spirituality of the election as provinces were in prayer for God to give TASA a leadership that is from Him rather than a leadership that is from our own human minds. TASA even though we have democratic processes that guide our operations, has a strong spirituality element which drove elections to be Spirit inspired and thus elections were practically a way in which God would grant leadership to TASA.
In the period since 2015, TASA grew at an exponential rate whereby TASA opened new branches in various institutions across the country. TASA exists in all provinces of South Africa, Zimbabwe, Lesotho and Botswana. In 2017 TASA also spread its wings to the University of Havana in Cuba where students in the Medical University formed TASA as a means of creating a home away from home. The existence of TASA in the Latin American country shows the presence of God in our midst and the work at hand to expand TASA all over the globe.